.. _goovis:

Goovis HMD
##########

Introduction
************

The following describes an alternative to the original HRSV unit from
ISI.  The original units use CRT monitors and the maximum resolution
is 720x1280 over VGA.  The idea is to replace the display using either
a VR headset or HMD.  Most VR headset require the use of their SDK and
in most cases, transferring the video over wifi.  We looked for a
solution that wouldn't require any SDK and simply show up as an extra
monitor under Linux.  This way we can just drag and drop the video
windows onto the HMD.  We tried two different units from Goovis, the
FHD one is not great (~$500) but the higher-end one looks like a
decent solution (QHD resolution, ~$1200).  We don't know how long
these products will be available.

Description
***********

Goovis link: https://goovis.net/products/g3max

Amazon link: https://www.amazon.com/GOOVIS-G3-Max-Most-Advanced-OLED-3D-Cinematic-Head-Mounted-Display/dp/B0CGJDQCT2

Head mounted display with dual QHD monitors (2560Ã—1440).  The two
monitors can slide left/right to adjust to the user's baseline.  There
are also focus adjustments so users can remove their glasses.  Other
features:

* Supports HDMI-3D.  We don't have any code for this (yet).
* Supports 3D using a single QHD channel with side-by-side images.
  The image is split into left and right channels and each use one
  half of the full image.  This means that we loose half the
  horizontal resolution.  The HMD has a button to toggle the 3D.  A
  quick press toggles between 2D and 3D.  A long press (3 seconds)
  swaps the left and right channels.
* "Large" field of view (FOV).  The internal displays are fairly large
  and cover most of the straight view for the user.
  .. warning::

     The lower-end unit has a smaller FOV and it feels like you're
     looking at a screen far away with a fair amount of black
     surrounding it.
* Head sensor.  The HMD automatically turns off the internal displays
  when the user is not present.  It turns out this signal is carried
  over the USB cable used to power the unit.  We can used this USB HID
  interface to emulate the head sensor.  This is quite convenient to
  turn on/off the tele-operation.
  .. warning::

     The lower-end unit (FHD) doesn't have this feature.

Using the internal head sensor
******************************

By default, the permissions on Linux are set so only the "root" user
can access the USB HID interface.  To grant permissions to all users,
the best approach is to create a ``udev`` rule (you can search online
for more information).  To identify the device's vendor ID, product ID
and path, use: ``lsusb -vvv | less``.  Search for "GOOVIS".  Once you
found the path (hidraw), vendor Id (880a) and product Id (3501), you
can set your udev rule:

.. code-block:: bash

   sudo mkdir -p /etc/udev/rules.d # create a directory if needed
   cd
   echo 'SUBSYSTEM=="hidraw", ATTRS{idVendor}=="880a", ATTRS{idProduct}=="3501", GROUP="users", MODE="0666"' > ~/80-goovis.rules # create the rule
   sudo mv ~/80-goovis.rules /etc/udev/rules.d/80-goovis.rules  # move the rule in the proper directory
   sudo udevadm control --reload-rules # apply new rules
   sudo udevadm trigger # to trigger the rules


To test/debug the udev rules, plug the device and then run ``udevadm
test $(udevadm info -q path -n /dev/hidraw0)``.

Then you can test the hid interface using the bus and device Ids
(found using ``lsusb -vvv``).  For example, if the bus is 1 and the
device 15:

.. code-block:: bash

   usbhid-dump -s 1:15 -f -e stream

As you place your head in and out the HMD you should see the values
changing in your terminal.  The head sensor status is the 17th value.

Once the permissions are set correctly, you can :ref:`edit your console JSON configuration file <config-head-goovis>` to use it.

Low-tech solution to stream the endoscope video
***********************************************

The following two solutions create two windows that can be dragged and
dropped on the HMD.  At that point, the HMD should be in 2D mode
(press the 3D button to toggle).  The view should be the same in both
eyes.  After the two windows are created (left and right views), you
can drag them to the HMD and place each on one half of the screen
(left and right).  If you're using the default window manager for
Ubuntu, you can drag the windows to the top corners and they will
automatically resize to use one half of the display.  You can also
drag the windows and press the "Windows" key + left or right arrow to
use the left or right of the display.  This works without having to
look into the Goovis.

Both solutions are based on ``gstreamer`` and rely on the
``glimagesink`` which allows to change the image aspect ratio.

Pure ``gstreamer``
==================

You will need two terminals to start two streams, one for the left
channel and one for the right channel.  Assuming your frame grabber is
a DeckLink (Black Magic), the ``gstreamer`` pipelines are:

.. code-block:: bash

   gst-launch-1.0 decklinkvideosrc device-number=0 connection=sdi ! deinterlace ! glimagesink force-aspect-ratio=false

and

.. code-block:: bash

   gst-launch-1.0 decklinkvideosrc device-number=1 connection=sdi ! deinterlace ! glimagesink force-aspect-ratio=false

ROS ``gscam``
=============

One of the issues with the pure ``gstreamer`` approach is that one
can't use the videos with ROS, whether for data processing or
recording.  We added a simple launch file to create two pipelines
(left and right) and for each channel, use a tee (``gstreamer``
"split") so ``gscam`` can convert the videos to ROS topics.  Assuming
your frame grabber is a DeckLink, you can use the launch file
``decklink_stereo_goovis.launch`` included in the ``dvrk_video``
ROS package.

Mount
*****

To mount the HMD in a rigid but adjustable way we decided to use a
short `Noga arm <https://www.noga.com/Products/POWE/Power%20Arms>`_.
We then drilled a hole matching the diameter of the screw used at the
end of the Noga arm.  We removed the head-rest pad and drilled in the
middle.  This ensured that we drilled through the metal plate used to
hold the HMD to the head-rest.

.. figure:: /images/goovis/goovis-hmd-mount-labeled.jpg
   :width: 600
   :align: center

In our case, the surgeon console is built using 80-20 aluminum
profiles so it was pretty easy to mount the Noga arm.

.. figure:: /images/goovis/console-80-20-goovis-labeled.jpg
   :width: 600
   :align: center
